---
title: "From The Vault"
layout: default 
---

### **THE ROCK SOUND 50**

Originally published in June, 2017

**How does it feel to be voted the most influential rock stars in the world right now?**

TYLER: "It's such an honour, honestly. In a lot of ways, this is more important to me than many of the accolades we have received over the last couple of years. This has been voted for by people we interact with daily - people who come to the shows and invest their time and energy in us."

JosH: "It's crazy. To see so many people dive beyond the music and to be so influenced on a real, human level is amazing. It's humbling that people hold us in such regard."

**Is the notion of being inspired or of finding people influential something you relate to yourselves?**

JosH: "I was always influenced by people in the weirdest ways. When I was a kid, my dad and I would rent a lot of old Dean Martin movies - we loved his Western movies in particular - and I wanted to be just like him. I loved the way that he portrayed this character and that it was so entwined in his art, but over time I felt as though through his work I started to learn who he was as a person. I think that stayed with me - the notion of a character and a true sense of self merging into one."

TYLER: "I get asked who my influences are all the time. People expect a certain answer from me - they expect a list of musicians or whatever - but I'm influenced by my family and people who have endured struggles, and who have overcome tremendous odds. I don't look at celebrities or people of a certain status and aspire to be them. I find inspiration in a different way to what people expect." 

**People have taken you into their lives in a very real manner. The scale of the connection you share is genuinely unbelievable at times.**

JosH: "Sometimes it's difficult to comprehend the size and scale to which [the band] has grown. Initially, we just wanted to go out, play some shows and capture people's attention enough that maybe they would stick around after the show and have a conversation with us. What we found pretty early on was that people did want to stick around, and I remember having a lot of really deep and intense conversations with people who found something that resonated with them in the music, or the performance itself. I always thought that was as deep as it could go, but over time it's gone far beyond that. It's something that no longer even needs to involve us directly. Whether it's the line at a concert or somewhere online, people are having those conversations with each other."

TYLER: "That connection is something that I always hoped for. I didn't know what I was doing when I started writing music - I just set out to be transparent regarding exactly what it was that I was feeling. That honesty seems to have resonated. It challenges people to apply what it is that I'm feeling to their own situations and their own circumstances. To write about things that only apply to me - about scenes, or about words, or about things that don't make sense to anybody else - is not something that fulfils me. I have always felt empty when writing something that feels like it's just for me, or that feels as though it wasn't meant to be shared. I want to live outwardly as much as possible." 

**That connection and level of influence must come with a lot of pressure.**

JosH: "I have three younger siblings, so it's something I have always known. The idea of having to set a good example and be responsible, or to look out for people is not new to me. I have always felt like the trailblazer in my family in a lot of ways, as though I'm trying to clear the path for those who follow. That's not to say that I have always been the best role model or that I haven't done a lot of really dumb stuff - not necessarily to [my siblings], but maybe around them - and it can be embarrassing or frustrating. I'm supposed to do better - I'm supposed to show them the way. I have learned a lot, but I put that down to the fans in the same way I put a lot of other stuff down to my siblings. They hold us accountable, or rather they make us hold ourselves accountable."

TYLER: "Sometimes I don't want to get up and be that person who has people watching them. Those are the days when I'll just kind of stay huddled in a room, but that's okay. It's okay to recharge, and it's okay to take a step back. I feel like knowing when to breathe is part of being responsible. Like Josh, I'm the oldest of four, so I'm no stranger to expectation. I'm used to people watching me - I'm used to people learning from me and what I do. Honestly, the easiest way to keep [myself] in check is to not go to a lot of stuff. Whenever we get asked to go to awards shows, to perform on television or have our photograph taken, I say no to it left and right. When you consider the size and the profile of this band and how much we put ourselves out there, it's pretty minimal. I don't crave any more attention than I have."

**Does it affect you when people doubt the sincerity of what you do?**

TYLER: "A lot of people, particularly in the more mainstream and pop culture arena have this idea of how the band happened. It's usually really shallow - as though a major label concocted this thing and we had all these people come in and write the music for us, and that we're just these two young guys who somebody found and pushed together to play it. That's a pretty common perception in some corners. They don't know what our fans know - they don't feel that authenticity. I have never even co-written a song before, let alone had anybody write one for me. Sometimes I want to scream so hard. It's like, 'Don't you get it? Don't you get that this isn't just some formula? This is real, and people are drawn to it because it's real!' For anyone to doubt [our sincerity] is upsetting."

**Do you think people would be surprised to know how much they influence you, rather than it being purely the other way around?**

TYLER: "Oh my gosh... I can't even begin to tell you how accurate that is."

JosH: "For me, it kind of goes back to what I was saying earlier, about the notion of being an older brother and having an example to set. There are days when I just don't want to do that stuff, honestly. There are days when I don't even want to interact with my brother or my sisters, and there are days when I don't feel like being a good influence, but they push me to. That's what my family and also our fans give me the most - they drive me to be the best that I can be. Our fans give me so many amazing opportunities, and it all stems from their dedication and passion. Music; drawings; paintings - they inspire me every day. I spend so much time getting lost in it all, trawling through these amazing pieces of art and reading what people say. They make me want to be a better person."

TYLER: "There is always a goal in mind when it comes to writing a song. Quite often it's to mend a piece of myself or to better myself in some way, but it's other people who I think of most. When I play a song in front of an audience, when people hear it and those emotions bounce back? That's when I feel alive. The importance of our fans and what they give us, and what they make me feel cannot be underestimated. It's because of them that I strive for more. They influence everything, right down to how the music is written. We are writing music right now and there are pauses - there are moments that don't structurally make sense - but I need those moments, because when we play them live I want the lights to go up so that I can see people. I want those moments to exist because of the fans."

**What are some of the biggest lessons you have learned over the last two years?**

TYLER: "You will never find the right pants. I feel like we're never going to find them, so we should all just stop - they do not exist. It's something that I arguably think about too much, probably because I spend so much time onstage with people looking at me. Josh and I were talking about this just the other day. He decided that if I were to embark on any kind of solo project, I would be known as Pants Joseph, because I just don't shut up about pants. I feel like I've learned a lot in the last year or two, but nothing more clear or concrete than that." JosH: "I think the way in which people perceive what I say has been something I have had to adjust to. Tyler and I have always had a lot of inside jokes - a lot of banter, if you will - and sometimes those things don't translate on a larger scale. We want to make sure that everybody feels loved and accepted, and I think we have had to learn that a lot of things we joke about, or that we talk about and the way that we talk about them, might not be so clear to other people. We have a responsibility to be clear and considerate in everything that we say, and we have learned that lesson a lot over the last couple of years. We have definitely matured on the back of it."

**Do you still have personal goals and ambitions?**

JosH: "I feel like I've spent a lot of my life resisting the opportunity to learn new things or improve myself somehow. When I was a kid, I remember my parents telling me that I had to do so many things. I had to go to school; I had to go to soccer practice; I had to go to summer camp - I never wanted to do any of those things]. Yet every time I did, I ended up enjoying them. Every time summer camp ended, I didn't want to leave, even though I didn't want to go in the first place. Those were the experiences that made me grow. Now that I'm an adult, there isn't anything that I have to do if I don't want to. The only person who can push me now is myself, so I'm trying to do a lot of stuff that I had never really wanted to do before or that I had never considered doing. Maybe I want to learn more instruments or different parts of music composition, or maybe I want to learn a new sport. There's always something new to experience or something to improve on. That is what excites me most - feeling like there is still so much more to come."

TYLER: "I feel as though I still have so many goals, both personally and musically, but in a way they all kind of link together. I think I'm always cautious about how I allow myself to evolve and how I allow myself to feel about certain things. I don't ever want to become so obsessed with improvement that I become unhappy - I don't want to become dissatisfied with the things I have done or the things I have created previously. I don't want to view anything I have done as not being worthy enough. I see a lot of artists becoming frustrated or trying to distance themselves from certain aspects of their past, and I hope it's not something I ever feel. I hope I don't feel the need to reinvent myself or look back on things and wish they were different. I hope that I can continue to be content."

### **THEROCK SOUND AWARDS**

Originally published in December, 2018

**Trench is officially the album of the year. What does that mean to you?**

JOsH: "It's an honour, and it's cool because it's my favourite album of the year too! We're on the same page at least. To be serious, though, this is awesome. It's still crazy to us that we're even considered to be on the same level as some of the bands that [people know and love so dearly], so to win something like that is special." TYLER: "It's amazing, honestly. For something that lived by itself for so long throughout the creative process, and for it to somehow be compared favourably to the other records that were released this year, especially when you see the other bands and artists that it was up against... it means a lot. It's very validating."

JosH: "My drums are on the album, which I never really thought about before now, so that's cool. I'm going to throw that in Tyler's face for sure."

**Going back to the beginning, when it came to starting a brand new record, what was the mission statement? What did you want it to be, and what did you feel that it needed to be?**

TYLER: "I knew it needed to be honest; now more than ever. In many ways, this album could have represented an opportunity not necessarily to be dishonest but to stray from honesty being such a central pillar. Coming off the back of an album like Blurryface, I think it would have been very easy to enter a world that was focused primarily on the notion of success, but for me, it really went no further than making something real and honest. That was extremely important."

JosH: "Being a fan of my own band meant that, for me, the most important part of creating a record was simply that it was enjoyable as much as it was different. I think that what I wanted the album to be was exactly that - something new and exciting. I wanted it to be something that wasn't remotely predictable, but was still very obviously a Twenty One Pilots record."

**How do you get back into the headspace of creating something new after living inside another world for so long? How do you flip that switch?**

TYLER: "I don't know that you necessarily flip the switch yourself. First and foremost, you simply hope that you become inspired. That's impossible to force or fake. There are times [when you're making a record] that it feels like an impossible task and when it feels like the last thing in the world you want to do, but you don't have a choice. I knew it was necessary because when something ends, particularly something as big as what we had experienced previously, the idea of not Alling that void is more daunting than starting all over again." JosH: "For me, an album ultimately represents the moment when you build a new live show, and going from constant touring to creating something new has definite similarities. Having those conversations, talking about how something is going to look and thinking about where something is going to sit on a stage - they're not a million miles apart. For me at least, it's something that I enjoy. I like building something new that we are going to take on the road for people to see.

**Tyler, you built a studio in your basement to write and record the majority of the record. How certain were you that it was the right path to take?**

TYLER: "Oh, man... I don't know. To be honest, there are days when I still wonder if it was the right path to take. I think that ultimately, there was something in my heart that knew this was the way to go - to just live inside my basement - but even when I first listened to that feeling and settled on the idea, if you had asked me if I were sure I would probably have said that I wasn't. The entire process going back to simply making that call in the first place was riddled with uncertainty, but I quickly realised that uncertainty doesn't have to get in the way of honesty. In the main, I was focusing on making sure that nothing was coming in and getting to me, and creating an environment that meant if anything ever managed [to get through], I could find a way to push past it."

**Josh, what were your first thoughts when Tyler told you that he wanted to take on a task as mammoth as this one?**

JosH: "I was excited. I remember the first conversation we had about Tyler self-producing [the album], and my reaction was pretty much one of, 'It's about time!' For as long as I have known him, he has been super-creative and independent, but he also has a great deal of self-awareness. He's always questioning whether or not he's good enough to do something, and I appreciate that honesty and vulnerability. More than anything, I liked the idea of dialling things way back after Blurryface and maintaining as much control as possible. It would have been very easy for outside influences to take hold."

**The album has a strong narrative, to say the least. How do you go about trying to piece a world that huge together, let alone cohesively?**

TYLER: "To start with, it isn't any more complex than just writing it all down. I began plotting the stories and building the environment before I had put pen to paper on any lyrics or any type of structure. That was the complete opposite of past albums when the story had been built from song to song. I knew that I wanted to tap into those details from the very beginning, but what's interesting is that once had that Skeleton the record] showed me where to go all by itself. It allowed me to paint such a clear picture that I almost instinctively knew where the songs would need to go, how they would need to evolve and what they would need to represent. It was still a challenging process, but for me, knowing what story I wanted to tell was the best way I could have approached making this record."

**Was there a moment during the album's creation when you feared it might be too much? How heavily did the challenge weigh on you at its worst, and did the force of it surprise you?**

TYLER: "It almost crushed me entirely, to be honest. There were times when I would come upstairs, and there was nobody around other than my wife, and I would just look at her and go, "This is the worst thing I have ever done. Looking back, maybe some of those occasions were a little magnified or a little inflated in some way, but in the moment that was exactly how I felt. I don't always think about just how difficult it was now that I'm out the other side, but I try to reconnect with those feelings when I'm onstage playing those songs. I think about how, in those moments, the idea of sitting on a couch and talking to you, about how it worked out and being able to say that I finished the process... it just wasn't real. There were so many times during the process of making this record when I would talk to friends and family, or the people in my inner circle and they would all tell me not to worry; that I would get it done and that it would all work out. It was never that I didn't believe that I would get it done, it's just that getting it done still means having to go through it. Even when you wake up for the first time and know it's over, it doesn't take away from how hard it was."

JosH: "Maybe it's easier for me to say, but there weren't any moments when I felt as though the process was too overwhelming. When it comes to the people who have been around this band since the very beginning, I have complete faith and trust in the decisions that we all collectively make, and when it comes to Tyler, I have an unwavering belief in his vision and the way that he likes to work. At every single stage of our career, I have always believed in the future and what it is we can achieve, and that wasn't any different this time around."

**What was the feeling like when the album was officially delivered? How did it feel when it was done, it was over, and there was nothing more to do, or that you could do?**

TYLER: "It was a good feeling. Creating a record is such a challenging experience at the best of times, but when you can hand it over and you can meet all of the deadlines - when you can sit there in the knowledge that you have put everything into those songs that you spent so long living inside of - that's special. If I had felt as though I had failed to jump over any of the obstacles in front of me or that I still had a lot to say, that could have been disheartening."

JosH: "In the days [before the record was finished], we were sitting and making some changes, tying up loose ends, and I remember thinking to myself, We can work on this every day for another year and we might still never feel as though it's finished? At some point, you have to set that aside and be okay with something going out and living."

**The days leading up to the album's unveiling were feverish, and the excitement from fans was palpable. What were the hours leading up to that moment like for you?**

JosH: "For me, there was definitely some pressure - some wondering as to whether or not people were still going to be there when the lights went back on. I definitely thought about that a lot."

TYLER: "It was intense, but it was also only one part of the battle because you never truly know if you've gotten the reaction that you're hoping for until you play a live show. So, while there was that initial unveiling of new music, the gap between that moment and playing our first show felt somehow more uncertain than what came before it. It's hard for both of us not to set our sights to being onstage. It's not about comments on the internet or how songs are being reviewed - it's about communicating those songs to an audience and hoping they're accepted. I don't remember spending that much time worrying about how the music was being received, because all I could focus on was building a show."

JosH: "There was a lot of excitement for me about being able to say hello again more than anything. I love interacting with people. The feeling of being able to show people what we have been working on, especially after being silent for such a long time, was awesome. Seeing the calendar filling up and knowing that other people would be there was a really amazing feeling."

**The first songs to be released were received very positively. Was there a sense of relief in that, regardless of how much value you may or may not place on public opinion?**

TYLER: "You think they were received positively? I guess I still don't know that. That's amazing! It's such a cool thing to hear, even now. To hear you say that while we're speaking about the fact that we have won an award and for you to say that people have reacted positively... it makes me wonder how aware of everything I actually am. I'm not doing a lot of searching for outside opinions as to whether or not these songs are good, even now, so it means a lot when that information arrives organically. Sometimes, hearing that and having these conversations helps a lot. Thank you."

JosH: "For me, the reality only hits home when we're onstage every night, and right now, as we end the first chapter of this tour, it feels incredibly positive. I love driving past the line of people waiting to get in, and looking out every night and seeing what people have turned this album into. It's the coolest thing in the world, and so while it's great if people did respond positively to the songs when they first heard them, and obviously I appreciate every kind word and always want people to like it, what we're living with now is the real validation."

**What you did was a huge gamble, from the way that the album was made to completely disappearing from view for an entire year. How do you hold your nerve when you're in that situation, and what do you think of those decisions when you look back at them now?**

JOsH: "The notion that it could not work crossed my mind at times, but I always have that small seed of doubt

- it's the reason I'm still so excited when people turn up to a show! Making something new is always scary. I think that if it wasn't [scary anymore] then I would be more unsettled by that than anything else."

TYLER: "I don't even know how aware of those risks I was. Maybe I simply didn't allow myself to be aware of the magnitude of it all, in terms of any kind of external viewpoint. I think that perhaps the relationship that I have with our fans is such that we all kind of agree, whether that be on the type of music that we want to listen to or how that music needs to be created. Just because a song comes from me doesn't mean that it's good, but being by myself and putting myself in an environment where I can be honest about that fact - about whether or not a song has value or is of a certain standard - is something that I think our fans understand. When it comes to the idea of taking risks or dodging hazards, I don't know if I even see it that way myself. I think that knowing such trust exists and knowing that the understanding is there from the fans meant that, in my mind, there wasn't much danger to be found."

JosH: "Ultimately, we looked at each other and went, "This is what we are doing, and we are going to stick with it and work as hard as we can.' There are no guarantees regardless of how you make an album, whether it's on your own or in the way that people tell you that you are supposed to do it, but we had a strong belief that this was the right way. Nothing that has happened in the time since then has made me feel any different."

**Has living with the record for a few months changed the way that you view it all? Does it feel different to how it initially did?**

JOsH: "For me, I have discovered a completely new side to this album purely through playing the songs live. Primarily, that comes from seeing how the songs resonate and how people connect with and respond to them in front of our eyes. My thoughts and feelings on the songs change almost nightly as a result, and I think that's a good thing. I love that I get to experience this album differently through the eyes of the audience." TYLER: "Now more than ever, I have come to embrace the simple fact that songs I have written are a representation of who I am in that moment. I can listen to much older songs, and the songwriter and producer inside of me is able to get in there and allow myself to see how I have grown, and to pull out things that I would have changed or done differently. It's okay that I don't consider those things to be perfect. I'm okay with the fact that I'm already listening back to this record and finding little things that maybe I would change if I could go back, because I realise that it's exactly what it was meant to be. I'm proud of every aspect of it, and even as I continue to grow and change over time and as this record stops being so fresh and new, I'm still going to feel that way."

**What are the biggest lessons this album has taught you, about yourselves as well as the band?**

JosH: "That the nature, the value of our relationship and our friendship is really important. I think the importance of being honest with each other and trusting each other on every level is more apparent to me than ever. The encouragement that we gave to one another throughout creating this album and the results that we have seen come out of that have taught me that, above all else, the bond that we share is really special. I think that is the best thing I have learned from this record." TYLER: "Towards the end of the Blurryface cycle, when things were at an all-time high, the feeling that perhaps Twenty One Pilots was about more than just me, Josh and our fans started to creep in. The commercial and cultural relevance of the band revealed itself, and a lot of different people started to circle the boat. I think that what Trench has taught me or perhaps reminded me of is that this band is and always will be about nothing more than me, Josh and those people. It's not a closed door, but we're not standing outside asking anybody to come inside. We're happy with the people who are already here."
